You are a connoisseur of historical
financial market bubbles.
Which one are Which one is most similar
to the current period that we're in?
>> People
tend to think a bubble, oh, it has to be
somehow a con job. And it's exactly the
opposite.
The great bubbles are the biggest ideas
for decades. So, the only one as big as
AI is possibly the railroads. Of course,
everybody could see that the railroads
were going to change the world. You
arrived at the railway station in a
horse and buggy, for heaven's sake.
And you know, you you went at
7 mph, and then you got on a train
traveling at 60 mph, and went a couple
of thousand miles. I mean, it was
utterly revolutionary.
So, what happened?
Everybody could see that the railroads
were going to change the world, which
they did.
Everybody wanted to have a piece of it,
and they could. Everybody put their
money in it, and you had the biggest
bust on both sides of the Atlantic that
you could imagine, and everybody lost
their money in railroads. And out of the
ashes,
the tracks were still there,
the locomotives were still there, the
demand was still there,
and uh
it changed the world.
And then you fast forward
to the internet. Powerful idea,
clearly, by the way,
accompanied by a lot of silly stuff
uh as well, but under underneath it, a
very powerful idea. To have a great
bubble, you have to have decent economic
times. The better
off, the better the bubble.
You have to have easy money, the better
and easier,
et cetera, the better the bubble.
And you have to have a fabulous idea.
And you have to have it so obviously be
important that everybody can see it.
Now, they're very, very rare events,
aren't they?
This one is as big as anything but the
railroads.
I am
not even prepared to say it isn't bigger
than the railroads. It It may be, but
they're the two super champs.
Besides them, I think the internet is
Yeah, a bit of a
But, they're the two colossal ones.
If ever there was a massive idea that
will change is already changing the
world, it's AI. Does anyone not know
that?
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, I have a headline for you.
>> Go on. Oh, yes. It is a good day for
headlines.
>> You probably According to June 16th, you
have a lot of headlines you could
>> That's right.
>> choose from.
>> But, one in particular, I'm sure you saw
this already. Uh SpaceX extends gain to
17% set to overtake Microsoft in value.
>> I had a feeling I think at some point
did they also overtake Amazon and like
all those?
>> Yes, I think um in the last week, I
mean, we were traveling the week of the
SpaceX IPO, but it just captivated
everyone and day after day and there are
I am sure there are any number of
superlatives. You know, at Bloomberg we
really like superlatives. You know, it's
like it's like the largest gain since X
or the biggest and I
>> It's more stats than superlatives.
>> Um well, I suppose, but uh there was
also one I saw um I guess yesterday, so
June 15th was the the world's 500
richest people collectively added $366
billion to their wealth. It's the single
biggest, you know, it's the numbers get
bigger over time. There are some It's
some big times for the market.
>> A nice day for them. But, the crazy
thing about SpaceX is Okay, you have
this company that's now worth $2.7
trillion dollars something on 20 billion
dollars of revenue from 2025. And I
can't even do, you know, if we're
talking about valuations, you can't even
do a traditional price earnings ratio
cuz there's no earnings. There's just
sales. And the price to sales ratio is
more than a hundred, [clears throat]
something like that.
>> You know, look, like
I don't even know where to begin.
>> [laughter]
>> I mean, you you've seen
>> Choose a superlative, Jeff.
>> Yeah, choose a superlative. I mean, the
the argument that's being made is that
um
There's a lot of arguments being made.
But people are like, "Oh, it's actually
an AI company because of all the GPUs
and data centers that they've built."
They really do have, and we've done an
episode on this, an extraordinarily
commanding lead in space and satellites
and Starlink etc. Um, you know, the
revenue is what it is. I don't know.
>> But also, I think it's fair to say
things feel a little bit speculative
at the moment, right? You see a headline
like that, 17%. That's
you know, overtaking a stalwart of the
tech industry in the space of It's been
less than a week, right?
>> Yeah, I mean, you know, look, I mean,
the other thing is, look, these
companies are like and I know we're
going to get these other big IPOs later
in the year with OpenAI and Anthropic,
presumably.
They've built, you know, I mean, SpaceX
has been around for a long time. They
Historically, companies came public much
earlier etc. So, obviously, you know,
the It does have 22,000 employees. It's
a big company. But the revenue is what
it is. And if you're looking at it from
a sort of like valuation-based
metric, you would have to say at a very
minimum
investors are if are you have to be
banking on very rapid growth in the very
short term in the coming years to expect
good returns here.
>> Right. So, obviously, one of the big
talking points in market
>> that like I'm looking at the DES page
for SpaceX. Do you know where it's
headquartered?
>> No, actually.
>> Starbase, Texas.
>> Oh.
>> So, they apparently So, I So, have their
own town in Texas that they got to name.
But, that is their corporate info on on
the DES page, Starbase Texas. From 2021.
>> 2.7 trillion. So, All right, the big
talking point in markets is obviously
valuations. All of this AI frenzy, is it
a bubble? Is it not? But, even if you
think that a lot of this is speculative,
>> Yeah.
>> my big question is, what do you actually
do at this point, right? Because so much
of the market has been momentum driven
recently. AI enthusiasm is pretty much
everywhere. So, we talk a lot about
weightings in the in indices, benchmark
indices of big tech. But, also, as we
discussed recently with Torsten Slok in
his great presentation at our live show,
like the AI factor is basically embedded
in pretty much every stock at this point
in time.
>> Well, you know, look, I'm the way I look
at it for my own investing in my
retirement, that I very have like sort
of very boring normie index-based
investing. It's like, look, I may be
missing out, but these are great
returns, etc. I'm not managing other
people's money. You know, other people
like that's
>> That's a nice luxury.
>> You know what I'm saying? It's like I
have the luxury of being able to say,
"These are fine returns I'm just getting
from the S&P or whatever, uh roughly,
and that's fine. It's a great year." And
if like, sure, I didn't like, you know,
I'm not all in on 2x levered Korean
memory stocks, but I'm still like these
are great returns. Had I been Had
someone been paying me to manage their
money, I don't know if they'd be happy
to get market returns right now.
>> Yeah, that's right. So, this poses a
bunch of interesting questions.
Obviously,
>> Yeah.
>> the big one being, are we in a bubble or
not? And then, I guess the next biggest
one being, well, what do you actually
do?
>> Yeah, how do you stay sane?
>> That's right. How do you stay sane in a
giant market bubble? And we do in fact
have the perfect guest, someone who has
managed to do that over the years, more
or less, I think. We're going to be
speaking with Jeremy Grantham. He is the
co-founder and long-term strategist at
GMO, as well as the author of the new
memoir The Making of a Perma-Bear, The
Perils of Long-Term Investing in a
Short-Term World. And famously, the
caller, the accurate caller of many
previous market bubbles, including
dot-com, which is the parallel that
everyone keeps using. So, Jeremy, thank
you so much for coming on Odd Lots.
>> It's a pleasure. Thank you for having
me.
>> So, what do you recommend investors
[laughter] do at this point in time cuz
it seems like there's no escape from AI
enthusiasm, to put it mildly.
>> Well, my simple advice is usually
try and avoid the hype, check the
numbers.
And 100 times sales pretty well
does the job for you.
It's easy for uh
kind of market historians to be having a
good time. These are extraordinary
times.
It's seldom been more interesting. I'm
thrilled to be alive
>> [laughter]
>> all the all the major issues that I have
spent my life studying and particularly
the last 15 years are coming to a head
basically at the same time.
>> [clears throat]
>> And uh to find that
being met by the highest priced
market in history, give or take,
uh
is extraordinary.
And I think in 50 years
market historians will look back and
talk in awe
of SpaceX
and read
as the kind of novel  joke
it its prospectus
and compare it with the stories they
tell about the South Sea Bubble, you
know, an undertaking of such enormous
value that it cannot cannot be at this
time revealed.
They scooped up a lot of money and and
ran off with it and they deserved it.
>> The naming of your book, The Making of a
Perma Bear,
what is like when I read that title,
should I have Perma Bear in air quotes
as in like people perceive you to be a
Perma Bear?
Or do you
>> I voted for quotes
and the public [laughter] didn't like
it.
>> Interesting. Yeah, because like because
A, I don't you know, I know you you've
warned, you know, I associate you with
like warning about that the markets can
get over their skis and understanding
market history etc. etc. On the other
hand, I look at GMO's holdings and
positioning and I see names like you
know, I do not see funds that are just
overwhelmingly in treasuries and gold
and safe, you know, safe haven assets. I
see ownership of Meta and Microsoft.
This does not look like the
portfolio of someone who I would think
of as a quote Perma Bear unquote.
>> When I was 70, I figured it was time to
leave my colleagues in charge of all of
the day-to-day decisions. I have nothing
to do with the portfolio today. My only
job is to study long-term
existential threats to the market and
society
and that includes the making and
breaking of the great bubbles, which is
fine because I have always
for 50 years at least considered the
making and breaking of the great bubbles
to be the only thing that really
matters.
The rest of the time, show up for work,
keep your nose clean, you're doing fine.
But the
forming of these spectacular bubbles and
their breaking really separates the men
from the boys.
>> So, you touch on this in the book, but
when we're in the midst of a major
bubble and people are seeing crazy
returns like 17% on SpaceX,
what do you tell clients when you know,
they're missing out on these huge gains.
I assume you're encouraging them to be
patient, to wait for that mean
reversion, but how do you actually
handle the pressure of having a
customer, a client who is under pressure
to at a minimum meet their benchmark?
>> With great difficulty.
It's always been difficult dealing with
clients in a major bull market.
And luckily we've had quite a bit of
experience because
since Greenspan we've gone from one
overpriced market to the next.
Starting with the tech bubble and then
the housing bubble and then
in the sense the end of 22 was a
the end of 21 was a
a spectacular overpriced market and now
this. So you've had a lot of experience.
And um
we we're more careful at handling the
clients now than I think we were in the
tech bubble.
Where we famously lost
half our book of business in 2 and 1/4
years.
>> Actually, can you explain what does that
look like in practice? And I understand
that you're not
active day-to-day in the security
selection, but obviously people who work
for you are in the very active and
obviously in the client handling. What
does that actually look like in practice
of like uh
good client management at any firm?
>> In our case
being as honest as you can be
lay the facts
on the table, make them as clear as you
possibly can.
Try and take out 100% of the hype.
And kind of engage with your client
so that they understand exactly how you
see the market working. Why it does
this, why it does that, how it's in
general priced.
And um
you know, that's a long continuous
job. And it keeps going in the bull
markets and the bear markets.
And um um
what changes really is the client's
level of excitement.
>> Mhm.
>> They they become
careful and miserable for a while and
then
excited and jumping up and down for a
while.
Uh but our process of trying to deliver
the facts as we see them doesn't really
change much.
>> I think a lot of people would probably
agree that markets feel a little frothy
at the moment, but I think there's also
a mentality, again, it goes back to this
momentum factor that's dominated in
recent years, but I think there's a
mentality that everyone just assumes
they're going to be able to get out
before everyone else. Everyone's going
to head for the exits at the same time,
so you enjoy the gains and then
hopefully you're slightly smarter than
everyone else and you manage to save
yourself before the bubble actually
bursts. How do you go about thinking
about timing of the bursting of bubbles?
What are the signs that you actually
watch out for in terms of when everyone
is heading for the exits all at once?
>> Wow.
It's um
I I have a few rules
that have worked uh
more often than not.
Um the one that's most interesting to me
has only flashed four times
since 1925.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh and that is
that the uh in the early phases of the
bubble
that is, we define a bubble as a a rare
two sigma event.
And based on the price only.
And when it breaks through that um let's
assume 1928, you have a huge move and
the stocks that lead it, you know, are
going up 60 80% for the year.
And then in 1929
uh the junkie flyers start to go down.
It's It's that they underperform a
rising market. The market goes up 35% to
the peak in 20 in in October.
They can't even get the sign right. The
previous years' leaders, the spectacular
movers, start to decline. And they spent
the whole of '29 going down.
And by the time the market broke,
the S&P low-priced index, which
regrettably was discontinued years ago,
uh was down almost 40%.
And uh
the low-priced index were a bunch of
fallen angels with enormous
uh
volatility, very high betas.
And they had had a spectacular 1928, and
they started to decline.
Uh why is that?
I I I have a I have a theory that this
is
relates to Mr. Prince's
unusually honest answer.
Why is he still in the bull market? As
long as the music's playing, I have to
keep dancing.
And that, of course, is the name of that
game. But he doesn't have to dance with
Pumatech. Pumatech was the most advanced
spec in uh
'99.
Which was a hell of a good year to be
the most advanced stock.
Uh
and you don't have to go off the cliff
in Pumatech.
You you go off the cliff in Coca-Cola.
And that's the ideal. And that's exactly
what happened in 1929. People grab In
that case, actually Coca-Cola. They
gravitated to the Coca-Colas and the
radios, and and away from the junk. And
the junk started to decline. That's an
incredible signal.
The the the greatest prime primal scream
from the stock market ever. And nothing
like that happens again. You have
underperformance of high-flyers, but you
never have them go down in a decently
rising market until, drum roll, 1972,
the top of the Nifty 50.
The S&P goes up 17, the average S&P
stock goes down 17, so I can remember
the numbers forever.
And then we have the biggest bear market
since the Great Depression. That was a
truly miserable bear market. 73-74,
whether you had small cap, large cap,
quality, junk, everything went down 50%
and then when adjusted for inflation,
closer to 65, an absolute monster. And
nothing like it happens again until
2000.
In the year 2000, you may remember, the
growth stocks peaked horrifically in
February.
The rest of the S&P did not.
The rest of the S&P rose about 15%. So
you had a co-equal high in October.
But the growth stocks were down 40%
having been as low as 50%. By then, they
rallied a little and back
in September,
uh you had the S&P
as high as it was in March of 2000. Just
amazing deviation between the growth
stocks who'd been making spectacular
running in '98, '99 and early 2000
uh and and the rest of the market that
continued up. And then you had
a very sharp break the end of 2000.
A steady break
in 2001
and then to rub it in, a miserable minus
22% in 2002.
Uh and nothing like that
happens again
until
2021. In 2021, you may remember, the
meme stocks peeled off.
>> Yeah.
>> By the middle of the year, Cathie Wood
and her portfolio were going down. By
the end of the year, they were off 35
40% from their peak.
And yet, during that same 6 months, the
S&P powered ahead.
It's really quite remarkable when they
get the sign wrong. And and
unfortunately,
that I had an adventure with
QuantumScape. QuantumScape turned out to
be a meme stock without my knowing it
because I had a huge position
personally. And the reason I had a huge
position is that I was offered an
opportunity to invest several years
earlier on an all or nothing basis. I
took this big position or I had nothing.
So, I took a deep breath and it was much
too big for our foundation, which we
have for the protection of the
environment, the Grantham family. And
so, I had to own it personally. So, it
was the only stock that I owned.
And
it was a a very big chunk. And it came
as a SPAC. Um
at four times my investment. Better
better than a kick in the pants. $10 a
share up from two and a half.
And within 3 months, it was 131. And let
me just talk about 131.
Uh at the end of 2020, that was the very
first stock to peak out.
At over 130, it was bigger than General
Motors.
>> [laughter]
>> And it was a battery research lab.
>> Yeah.
>> They were going to design, with any
luck,
a solid-state battery. And they still
may.
But they still have not got a battery on
the market. So, this wasn't like SpaceX.
This had no sales. Forget no profits.
And was selling for more than General
Motors. Actually, I think that is more
speculative than SpaceX, which I think
is a very very high hurdle.
>> Yeah, I'm glad you brought back 2021
because that was a weird year.
>> Wild times.
>> It In a way that really was See, I would
argue that 2021 was actually much more
wild than right now because we don't
really, you know, because of the
proliferation of quantum escapes, which
was one of many stories that you could
tell. You could go back to the Rivian
valuation at its peak or numerous other
>> Ah, quantum escape is much higher.
>> Okay, okay, all right, all right, fine.
But But let's talk about AI for a second
because obviously we reached
memories of the dot-com bubble or 2021.
But I'm looking at a chart on my
terminal right now of Nvidia revenue.
So,
in 2019,
Nvidia had revenue of 11.7 billion.
And in 2025, it had revenue of 130
billion.
So, the revenue has gone up therefore, I
think, by over 10x um in 6 years. You
know, we talk about and everyone said,
"Oh, market the very high valuations."
Can't we say that the investor in Nvidia
in 2019
was getting the mother of all deep value
investing given what we now know in
retrospect about what its earnings were
about to do?
>> Well, obviously if you're clairvoyant,
it was a
>> Sure, sure.
>> a deep value
opportunity.
Um
Nvidia, obviously a brilliant company,
and AI, by the way, is spectacular
important development. But Nvidia,
the biggest piece of luck, I think, I
can think of in the last 30 years, you
have all your money in in chips made for
playing games,
and suddenly it turns out that that is
absolutely
the right the right design for AI. Yeah.
And you have such a running start that
it may take, you tell me, 5 years, 10
years?
It doesn't seem like the ultimate mode.
It seems like the ultimate head start.
In in a game where a head start is worth
a ton of dough. It is worth a 10 tuple
in your sales. But it's only a head
start.
Other people,
Google, gearing up to be competitors.
In the next decade, of course, there
will be plenty of competition. Maybe
even technologies that end run the
current type of chip. These things
happen.
History is full of them.
>> Well, Ken, let me just push on that
again. So,
I I take your point about Nvidia having
um this incredible moat from maybe
arguably stumbled into the technology
backwards cuz they were obviously in
video games before. But like I'm looking
at say even a Microsoft, 2020 annual
revenue of 143 billion, 2025 annual
revenue of 280 billion. So, we see the
biggest companies in the world doubling
real business in the span of 5 years,
which does not feel to me anything like
what we were seeing and I have fond
memories of 1999 myself. That's when I
got personally interested in markets.
These are gigantic businesses still
putting up huge growth numbers that lap
Wall Street forecast year after year.
>> Yeah, and for the record, um when
Microsoft first appeared in a tradeable
portfolio,
>> Yeah.
>> um
for GMO, it was in our value stream. We
had a value stream and a momentum
stream.
And we only bought the most attractive
10%. And we did that each month for 12
months.
So, we had 12 little portfolios, each
one the best 10% for each month of the
year. And Microsoft entered the cheapest
value decile and stayed there until July
of '99.
And that's because our value model
looked at
long-term future earnings and dividends
projected as best we could and we did
that through projecting return on
equity. And we did that by looking at
how return on equity regressed to the
mean and which factors
affected the rate. Certain factors
slowed it down.
Market domination, price setting that
you could prove slowed it down way way
down. And Microsoft was the perfect
uh
example of this.
It had very very low volatility.
>> Mhm.
>> It was clearly overwhelmingly the price
setter.
And consequently, our model said it was
worth nine times book, not seven times
book.
But it was selling at.
So, you have if you have a good value
model, you can you can buy these things.
You can see them on occasions coming
along. And yes, it's done spectacularly
well.
And has uh
had then particularly a much better moat
to me
than Nvidia has today.
>> Mhm.
>> But if you will allow me a
a minute here,
>> Please.
>> if you look at the Mag 7,
you look backwards in history.
And you can say with a pretty
clear conscience each one dominates
their seven different niches.
They have near monopolies on a global
basis.
Even Tesla, you know,
has a jump start,
the biggest and the best for for a long
time
in uh EVs.
And you have Amazon beginning to
dominate retail.
Google re uh research,
etc. etc.
Seven
decent monopolies
dominating the world.
Justice Department etc. perfectly sound
asleep. No one is interested in pulling
a Teddy Roosevelt. They're not going to
jump in and slash and burn and divide
Exxon into seven different pieces.
They're they're letting the these things
grow and and and fix
and set their pricing.
And make tons and tons of money.
And then you look forward.
Starting from today, does it look
anything like that?
Doesn't it look like
seven companies deciding they're all in
the same market, AI?
>> Right.
>> They're moving the most powerfully with
the greatest investment is dominant. Are
they not sitting here beating their
chest and saying, "My 200 billion in
investment in a single year is bigger
than your 127, Yahoo?"
They know how much gets paid off
to the first mover who grabs the market.
They all want to be
the first.
There can only be one, as they say in
the movie.
And
there's seven of them fighting it out.
It It could be
a very messy, blood curdling game.
I I suggested that they
have it outside
uh the White House.
Uh
and so I figured.
Um
What a comparison. Just imagine 10 years
from now looking back and saying,
"You couldn't see the difference between
seven easy monopolies
and and a dog fight of seven dishes,
rich companies, huge cash flow, huge
understanding of the virtues of being
dominant
all deciding at the same time to fight
out in one market?"
And you could say yes, there was the
cloud. What about that? And the cloud
was a nice, well-behaved oligopoly.
Three of them genteelly deciding
to compete in genteel ways.
Exactly the right thing to do if you
find yourself in that position. And
clearly not the approach that is being
adopted this time.
We have seen huge investment.
You look back, they're idea heavy,
capital light. You look forward, let's
hope they're idea heavy, but they are
capital heavy this time.
It's like a watershed in all almost
everything that matters between the past
and the future. And nobody seems to be
talking about it in that way. And I
don't get it.
>> The dot-com bubble has come up a number
of times in this conversation. Do you
actually have a preferred historical
analogy for the situation that we're
facing now? Because we've been through
technological revolutions associated
with speculative manias before, ranging
from I guess what I would say are pretty
real ones like the railroad bubble and
and the internet to
kind of crazier ones like we're all
going to go deep sea diving.
>> Yeah, totally.
>> And get rich that way. You are a
connoisseur of historical financial
market bubbles.
Which one are Which one is most similar
to the current period that we're in?
>> Ah.
So, people tend to think a bubble, oh,
it has to be somehow a con job. And it's
exactly the opposite.
The great bubbles are the biggest ideas
for decades. So, the only one as big as
AI is possibly the railroads. Of course,
everybody could see that the railroads
were going to change the world. You
arrived at the railway station in a
horse and buggy, for heaven's sake.
And you know, you you went
7 mph, and then you got on a train
traveling at 60 mph, and went a couple
of thousand miles. I mean, it was
utterly revolutionary.
So, what happened?
Everybody could see that the railroads
were going to change the world, which
they did.
Everybody wanted to have a piece of it,
and they could. Everybody put their
money in it, and you had the biggest
bust on both sides of the Atlantic that
you could imagine, and everybody lost
their money in railroads. And out of the
ashes,
the tracks were still there,
the locomotives were still there, the
demand was still there,
and uh
it changed the world.
And then you fast forward
to the internet. Powerful idea,
clearly, by the way,
accompanied by a lot of silly stuff
uh as well, but under underneath it, a
very powerful idea. So, you had
Amazon go up six or seven times in uh
99. And when the market broke, it went
down, famously, infamously, 92%
Check it. 92%, and then it rose from the
ashes, just like the railroads, and
inherited the retail market, more or
less.
So, you have to be To have a great
bubble, you have to have decent economic
times. The better
off, the better the bubble. You have to
have easy money. The better and easier,
etc., the better the bubble.
And you have to have a fabulous idea.
And you have to have it so obviously be
important that everybody can see it.
Now, they're very, very rare events,
aren't they?
This one is as big as anything but the
railroads. I am not even prepared to say
it isn't bigger than the railroads. It
It may be, but they're the two super
champs. Besides them, I think the
internet is, yeah, a bit of a But
they're the two colossal ones.
If If ever there was a massive idea that
will change is already changing the
world, it's AI. Does anyone not know
that?
I think everybody knows it.
Does anyone want to put their money in
it? I think SpaceX, etc., gives us a
pretty good idea. 90% of the value, if
you read the perspective prospectus, is
based on AI.
Even though that particular AI seems to
be having its bottom kicked by two or
three others as we sit, but wouldn't let
facts get in the way of a really good
story.
And um
This is an absolute classic. It checks
everything off, one after another, which
haven't been checked off many times
in history.
So, this is it. If you think this is not
a bubble, you are going to be in for a
bit of disappointment.
>> How do you channel In your book, you
talk about
how competitive you were and growing up
and wanting to play all different types
of games. How do you channel
competitiveness in in a productive
manner career-wise so that it doesn't
hinder you or doesn't make you chase
performance or doesn't make you worry
about one year's performance versus
one another competitor's? Like, how do
you How do you make the competitiveness
instant be a good thing?
>> I think
try and bring it to bear on a few areas
that that matter to you.
Uh starting with obviously the most
important, playing a decent game of
doubles in tennis.
And uh every point has to be played as
if your life depends on it
and you pick
partners and opposition who
who do the same
and you have a wonderfully good time.
And then you look around for other
things and for me it was ideas.
Um and and I could have made a lot more
money if I focused on profit maximizing
but for me the the idea was the dominant
idea and and sorry principle and and
the idea of being competitive was
everything
hinges on trying to
outthink the enemy.
The easiest way for me
it always seemed was to be longer and
and wider and more comprehensive
and and and stand further back
than the other guy. And what you
quickly [clears throat] realize when you
do that is that no one else is even
trying.
>> [laughter]
>> So this is not a fair fight. Everybody
is focused on the near term and if you
want to profit maximize that's not a bad
idea.
And very few people are
are attempting to be in the market and
simultaneously asking questions that are
several years out and and even to some
extent a decade or two out.
And um
so it's been very easy for me to be both
competitive and
and and cheerful and
and often wrong.
>> Since we're talking about career
development now I suppose is it
important when you're a perma bear or
more accurately when you're perceived to
be a perma bear to distinguish yourself
in some way from other bears who are out
there because again at this particular
moment in time there are a number of
high profile commentators who would say
that AI is a bubble. So how do you
actually stand out from I guess the
bubble calling crowd.
>> Yeah, I I've no idea. My
I have only made two unmitigated uh
bullish calls.
Uh the market has a really hard time
telling the difference between, "Hey,
this is overpriced.
This is going to make you less money
over the next 20 years than it would do
if it was half price." They're just kind
of mathematical uh realities.
I And because you say that, they all you
you said
the market was going to collapse. You
have been bearish forever. Now, when I
want to be really bearish and and and
recommend you get out of the market, I I
say so.
And I've only done that twice.
In in on July the 15th, 19
2008,
July the 15th, 2008,
I wrote a quarterly letter which
basically which actually said, "Abandon
ship." Save key per the French
equivalent. And actually quoted the
nursery rhyme, "Don't be brave, run
away. Live to fight another day."
And do not take any risk you don't have
to take. We all have restrictions on how
much we can get out of the risk-taking
business, but do not take anything you
don't have to.
Okay? And it's pretty clear.
And uh
the last thing that we had been bullish
about was emerging markets. And I said,
"I've changed changed our mind. We think
this is the end of the line.
Sell any emerging that you can."
And uh we did the biggest trade that we
had ever done getting rid of the last of
our emerging.
Um
I I must say shortly before we published
the letter.
>> What year was Sorry, which year was
that?
>> 2008, right?
>> The emerging call?
>> 2008.
>> Oh, okay. Got it.
>> Yes. And may I say that following that
in 4 months, emerging market halved. I
think it was the biggest sharpest
decline in the history of any major
index. From July the 15th
to November the 15th, and actually
slightly before that, the uh
the whole index halved.
And uh and the other
bearish one was uh
was at the end of 2021
where the quarterly letter
was called Let the wild rumpus begin.
Right? Uh
That meant now, get your tail out. Avoid
the market. I'm happy to say the S&P
went down like a rocket ship, minus 25,
growth stocks down 35, Mag 7 down 40,
and the bond market had the worst year
in the history of the bond market. And
then, as I also like to say,
my nice bear market was rudely
interrupted by ChatGPT.
And and the economy that was
doing its usual thing of of gracefully
moving into a mild recession because
animal spirits were going down was also
changed by massive and increasing CapEx
spending on AI,
which dragged, kicking and screaming,
the animal spirits of the rest of the
economy. They didn't change easily, by
the way. The S&P, the rest of it went
down for another 10 months.
But they kept going so powerfully in the
market and so powerfully in the CapEx
business that they changed the game.
That's only happened once in history.
And I don't know how to predict things
like that anymore than COVID. And new
new things are a pain.
And there aren't, happily, many of them.
But they're the two most interesting
ones in my career.
COVID was novel. How do you treat
novelty if you're a historian? You
don't. You have to work it out on other
principles. And this AI interruption of
what was a perfect perfectly ordinary
and I thought predictable uh bear market
because it it it flagged my great
discrepancy between the market leaders
going down as the blue chips continued
up.
How do you do that? I don't know.
>> Yeah, this is really striking. You know,
we we recently um
we had Torsten Slok at one of our events
talking about um you know, this sort of
imperviousness of the AI trade to what
traditionally we'd call macro. So, what
you describe, you're like, okay, here
comes the expected
as you said, probably would have been a
shallower recession. And now we see this
investment, this capital expenditure,
that's completely they could it does not
seem like uh the companies cared all
about the fact that the Fed hasn't cut
rates as expected, etc. These
classically macro indicators
that we recession, business cycle, etc.
had just seemed to be blown out of the
water. Yeah, blown out of the water by
the AI trade.
>> Yeah. And and I must say the
overwhelming interest in interest rate
and interest rate predictions has left
me
uh totally cold for the last 50 years.
I I leave that to other people.
I think it's in general
wildly exaggerated.
I've lived in a world where for 50 years
the increasing
debt to GDP ratio of the US economy, the
Japanese economy, and every other
economy has been predicting imminent
collapse.
And the ratio has gotten higher and
higher, and then it's predicted double
collapse. And it still keeps rising.
Um
the only function of of interest rates
is that it makes debt
easier to acquire.
And the function of easy
acquired debt is that it helps the
economy. One little problem.
If you go back to Alan Greenspan,
you find that before he gets there,
there is a very, very slow increase in
debt to GDP ratio
just because the financial business is
becoming more complicated. And then
after him, it rises at 45° and it goes
from a small fraction of GDP,
if you throw in all that, it it triples
and quadruples.
And and it does it over, you know, 30
years. You have biggest economy in the
world,
30 years to test what happens,
quadrupling of the debt to GDP,
and the growth rate goes down.
So, how can debt be a real
mover of growth rate
when you've had that wonderful macro
test seen from
looking back over 40 years? Huge
increase in debt, decrease
in GDP growth rate.
Very strange. So, I leave all that stuff
way alone.
If you will let me back up,
um
two I I was saying two clear get out of
the market calls,
plenty of the market's overpriced. The
market has been overpriced since 2000. I
admit it.
It's been overpriced
and we have said so the whole time
because looking back
at the 20th century, the 21st century
has been overpriced.
They used to sell at 15 times earnings.
We have been selling at 23 times
earnings. That is not a small fraction
of an increase.
It has been a different world, the 21st
century.
But based on history, it's been
overpriced.
And and of course, it still is.
But I have made two bull calls in my
life.
The only time for the first 10 years we
got quoted was in some something called
the Wall Street letter, long deceased. I
think it was a
attached to the Wall Street Journal.
And it was a weekly kind of gossip thing
about the industry.
And there hidden in the
tail end actually of of that letter
is my first opportunity to quote.
And it's July 82 and the PE of the S&P
is seven times.
And I say, I think we're close to an
unprecedented rally in both the stock
and the bond market.
And I've always been thrilled to get
people copies of this
>> [laughter]
>> newsletter.
And then the market shoots up and we
become more careful for a long long time
and then finally the market comes down
in 09.
And by a miracle that only occurs once
every two lifetimes, we published
a letter,
one pager,
uh only
two of those were done in my career of
30 years letter writing.
And it's called reinvesting when
terrified and
I think is is the best thing I wrote
mainly cuz it was short and it just
said,
do you won't call the bottom of the
market.
You know,
don't bother with that. Don't even try
it.
Just concentrate on the fact
that the market's gone is cheaper than
it's been for 22 years.
It's even on our
seven-year forecast, you're dealing with
12% a year compounded returns in the
S&P, equivalent to a higher numbers in
the emerging and and foreign equity.
Get together a plan, take it to your
committee.
Any plan is better than no plan. You
have got to start recycling your money
back into the market.
And the good news is
as far as I'm concerned, it only counts
if you wrote it.
>> Yeah.
>> Saying it is too peripheral. It gets
washed away in into the ether. But I
wrote it. And
we sent it to the Wall Street Journal
who
didn't get back. And and day by day,
four days passed until
my advisor on propaganda and I decided
to hell with this. Let's post it
ourselves. And because of that delay, we
posted it the day the market hit its
low. 666
on the S&P 500, less than 1/10 of where
it is today. My God, this has been a
bull market.
>> Oh, thank you for reminding two
podcasters that it only counts if you
wrote it.
>> No, it's good. We
>> Well, to be fair, we do write some
stuff, so there is that. Um can I just
go
>> some talking. I I sympathize with you.
>> Uh can I just go back to you were
talking about how investors seem to have
to some extent become more comfortable
with higher price-to-earnings ratios now
versus say for much of the last century.
When it comes to value investing, we all
know that value has been losing recently
to momentum. Does it feel at all to you
that something has structurally broken
in the sense that investors are much
more focused on price nowadays? They're
much more focused on short-term gains
rather than longer returns. And at the
same time,
you've had a lot of retail money flow
into the market
courtesy of, you know, new platforms,
Robinhood, and
whenever I think about Robinhood, I
think about clicking buttons. And
remember they used to have the animation
that would like celebrate if you placed
a trade.
>> Like that's a lot of new money coming
into the market that potentially thinks
differently to the way investors for
much of the 1900s actually thought.
>> I think in every bubble
it gets very much like this.
Um
and you said uh
much more focused on price.
Not in the sense that they're looking
for bargains, much more focused on
momentum.
>> Right, that's what I mean. Yes.
>> Price rises rapidly and and and they
like it.
And the value is irrelevant. This is you
know, this is what happened in the South
Sea bubble and this is what happened in
tulips and
it's what happened in the railroads and
it's what happens
in in in uh
the Nifty 50 and and the tech bubble.
It's what always happens. This is not
remarkable by the way. This isn't even
spectacularly overpriced compared to
Japan. Japan is the mother and father of
all bubbles.
Um
in 1989 it sold for 65 times earnings.
And if that doesn't make
a value manager wake up in the middle of
the night screaming once in a while,
nothing will.
Because uh you know, we we went up
finally to 35 times earnings in the tech
bubble, never having been over 21.
That's pretty spectacular jump.
But Japan had never sold over 25 times
earnings and went up to 65.
And uh I'm happy to say we survived that
quite well through uh
through good luck. And the good luck was
that international investing had only
just come in. And we were selling people
their first international portfolios
that they had ever had including Harvard
and Yale.
And um I think quite remarkable by the
way how slow the US was. Scotland and so
on had been
doing this uh foreign investing for a
long long time, but not It was not
fashionable in the US.
And uh
because of that uh
no one had
was comparing international with an
international index. It was only two or
three years or two or three months that
they had had an international portfolio.
They were comparing it with the S&P
because all their competitors were still
in the S&P.
And and the novelty there was betting
international against the S&P.
And uh it was winning.
The international was so far ahead that
we could underperform because of Japan.
And we underperformed by 10 points a
year for 3 years.
And we lost no business at all.
And we had a a decent market share.
And then of course Japan
broke. The lesson from Japan
is pretty clear.
The biggest
bubble in the history of the stock
market, of the important stock market,
second only to the land bubble in Japan
of of coincident more less coincident
timing.
And uh
what was the price you paid for having
it go from 25 to 30 to 40 to 50 to 60
65? And the Solomon Brothers team went
around at 60 to 65 explaining that the
bond rate in Japan was so low it should
be 100 times.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm not kidding you. I'm not kidding
you.
And uh
what is the price you paid?
A lost 20 years really, not 10 years.
35 years have to go by before you get
back to a high.
Uh and uh I don't think even that is
adjusted for the modest inflation that
they had.
I mean, you want to have a bigger bubble
and a better bubble?
Go ahead. Just be advised that the
correlation with a longer and worse
decline is pretty well one.
>> You know, I we could talk for another
hour just on international all these
things, but I have one last question.
You know, you're known for having a lot
of um
personal sort of like other interests
besides investing particularly related
to the environment,
climate change you talk about. You wrote
a letter I believe last year about uh
plastics and other forms of like dangers
to the environment. Do you have any
optimism at all that AI in particular
will be of a service to humanity in
tackling some of these concerns that you
have about sort of
the ecology and so forth.
>> God, I wish I knew. It
The spectacular thing about AI is the
degree of difference of opinion.
>> Mhm.
>> You know, often you find that the rank
and file have one view and the hot shots
who know the most have a different view,
but this is not like that. This is you
have Nobel Prize winners who disagree
violently. You have real experts who've
studied it for 30 years who disagree
violently.
>> Yeah.
>> You have the rank and file with the as
much experience as they could have who
disagree violently.
There is simply no agreement on the
future of AI. It will either make us all
incredibly
uh rich,
we'll sit on the beach and be served by
robots, or the robots will go one step
further and get rid of us inadvertently
or deliberately.
Um this is not bad.
This is the ultimate complexity that one
has ever heard.
And you cannot possibly know
what is going to happen. You can only
plan for a wide range
of outcomes.
But we know for a fact
that it chews up enormous amounts of
electricity.
We know for a fact that that is
associated with an awful lot of carbon
dioxide production and real pressure on
the environment. So, we start knowing
that it will be tough. And by the way,
you make robots every 20 every 20
minutes, these humanoid robots have to
go off, take a coffee break, and plug
themselves in.
>> Yeah.
>> They They will run through energy like
we have no idea. Like, we can hardly
support the energy demands of of current
AI
confined to your laptops.
Uh the energy demand of having machines
running around
uh will dwarf that beyond recognition.
We will have to have multiples of the
global energy production that we have
now.
We are simply living beyond our means.
You know, the real experts who studied
for 30 years say we need 1.7 planets to
maintain the current level of income
uh
in a sustainable way.
And um
if we want to live like Americans, we
need five planets.
And uh
AI
in the best of all possible worlds might
help address this.
But um
it's hard to imagine
AI becoming self-aware
and being better at everything
than we are.
Uh it's hard to think of an example,
as Geoffrey Hinton would say,
where a smarter civilization, a smarter
species,
has been dominated by a
a comparatively stupid species.
We We somehow implicitly
rely on their benevolence.
>> Mhm.
>> We are not spending that much time and
money trying to design a benevolent AI.
We are spending money trying to design a
more powerful competitive
devil take the hindmost uh
type of AI.
It It's inherited our our style, you
know, humans
have been the survival of the fittest.
Grab what you can while you can. Don't
worry too much
about
three or four years from now. I find
that exactly the same uh in corporate
America and and capitalism, by the way.
We don't act as if we value our
grandchildren. We play soccer with them
at the weekend, as I like to say, and we
help pay the school fees. Uh but then we
go back to work for a chemical company
or fossil fuel company and act as if we
mean to kill them all.
It It's a strange
nature, except it's the same as every
other species on the planet. Grab what
you can, live for today,
and uh
and here we are doing the same
with something we all recognize is a
bigger danger than anything we've ever
met before.
Living with a
with a another intelligence.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh that is going to be inevitably
much more than we are.
And uh
and we are left, you know, worrying
about PEs
when uh
when when the survival of our species is
at stake. When our
strangely
our climate is going to hell,
not as we used to think in 20, 30, 40
years, but now.
Our Our baby production is going to
hell, not as we used to think in 50
years or 100 years, but now.
No, China is producing fertility rate of
one.
A baby production that every 30 years
halves.
That in 90 years is an eighth.
And Korea is is a third of its
baby production each 30 years. A ninth
in 60 years.
A 27th. I.e. they're out of business in
a single lifetime unless it changes.
And it has been changing, but it's been
changing steadily for the worst.
65% of all countries are below
replacement.
And quite a few like China
are way way down towards one.
And nobody cares. We are not programmed
to worry about long-term slow burning
problems. And they're all coming to bear
together and they're compounded by our
ignorance or lack of concern about the
risks of AI.
This was going to be a very exciting
time.
>> Exciting terrifying.
>> Also, if we need five planets, I think
you just made the ball case for SpaceX.
>> I was just going to make the same joke.
Oh my god. I shouldn't have let you. I
shouldn't have let you go first.
>> There's another way to resolve that
though.
Uh and that is to uh have a billion
people and not eight or 10 or 12.
And the interesting thing is if you
asked a society to please have fewer
children
when they wanted more, you wouldn't have
a prayer
uh unless you used force.
But we are going to have a dramatic
sustained drop in our population. By
sheer luck we are the first generation
in history
who are deciding to have, for perfectly
good reasons, a hundred good reasons,
we've decided to have fewer children.
And if we keep doing this, we go out of
business. It's quite simple. If you
don't have 2.1
healthy, well-educated children, you're
on your way out.
And almost nobody does in the developed
world. And even in sub-Saharan Africa,
baby production is falling like a stone.
It's just falling from a very high
level. Falling from seven babies per
mother to four.
They have lost more babies
over the last 50 years than Europe has.
It's just that they've lost them from a
much higher level.
>> All right, we're going to have to leave
it there, but Jeremy Grantham, thank you
so much for coming on Odd Lots.
>> Oh, thank you for allowing me at least 2
minutes to talk about serious stuff.
>> Joe, I love talking about historical
bubbles.
>> too.
>> And I guess I should like shout out some
of our really old episodes at this point
on very esoteric bubbles like the
Florida land bubble, the catfish bubble.
I did think the point about the change
in the Mag 7 stocks.
>> Yeah.
>> The sort of watershed moment, this idea
of a cage fight on the White House lawn
and I guess a change in corporate
strategy where everyone is really
tackling the same area of business.
Yeah, that was interesting.
>> No, it's super interesting. Like, you
know, 10 years ago, you could draw a
very clear line between what Google's
business was and say Meta's business,
right? You can't do that to the same
degree when both of them, you know,
Meta, they're not right at the edge, but
they're trying to they want to be in the
game as like a model maker. They're also
spending both spending enormous amounts
of money on capital expenditures and so
forth. Like, they really are like no
longer the sort of dominance of their
verticals. But I have to say like this
conversation there at the end and he's
like, well, will the robots be our
butlers on the beach or will they
accidentally kill us or will they
purposely kill us or will humanity
extinct ourselves because we are stop
having having babies? Like, yes, it sort
of does make you like, why are we
wasting time talking about PE ratios?
Like, when these are like the big
questions that we're like right up
against.
Yeah, like why are we talking about PE
ratios ever?
>> How do I prep my portfolio for robot
extinction? Very important question.
>> Like the is Kevin Warsh going to cut and
>> know, 10 years from now. Like that's
probably not what's
anything will hinge on that in the grand
scheme of things.
>> Well, that's true. But again, this sort
of goes back to the big tech argument.
But if you couch everything in
existential terms, then you can justify
anything, right? Which is what we're
seeing right now.
in big tech. I realize I just naturally
went from talking about the extinction
of humanity back to big tech valuations.
So, yeah, I apologize for that.
>> You know, it's interesting, you know, we
did that episode about the history of
rope
recently. And you know, in that book, he
and he made the point on the podcast
that
you know, we went
for about a million years, maybe the not
I don't know if it's humans, but maybe
right before humans, where there was
literally one invention and that was the
hand ax.
And then you think about like in the
last few years alone between chat GPT
and GLP-1s and EVs, etc. And then Jeremy
was making the point like history is a
little bit boring. You know, the 1950s
like oh, Coke built a new factory and
that was news. And now like and what
that means is literally and
you know, other people have said this
like time is speeding up. Like there are
just more events per day happening.
>> Joe. I'm
>> I'm tired. I'm tired. But that it's good
for the news business. It's not so good
for our producers.
>> All right. On that note, shall we leave
it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy
Alloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our
producers, our tireless producers.
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Armon-Dash,
El Bennett at Dashbot, Caleb Brooks at
Caleb Brooks, and Kevin Lozano at Kevin
Lloyd Lozano.
>> And for more Odd Lots content, you can
check out our daily newsletter. You'll
find that at bloomberg.com/odd
lots.
>> And can chat about all these topics 24/7
in our Discord, discord.gg/allthoughts.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video, or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music]
[music and singing]